**5101.1: General information for using Loan Product
Advisor®(05/03/23)**

**(a)Access to and use of Loan Product Advisor®**

> Loan Product Advisoris an automated loan assessment system that
> indicates whether a Mortgage will be eligible for purchase by Freddie
> Mac, provided other conditions are met. Use of Loan Product Advisor
> can eliminate many of the manual processing and underwriting
> requirements of traditional Mortgage processing. Although Freddie Mac
> will continue to purchase manually processed Mortgages, Freddie Mac
> prefers and recommends that most Mortgages be processed through Loan
> Product Advisor.
>
> Loan Product Advisor may be accessed from a commercial Loan
> Origination System (LOS), a custom LOS system or directly via an
> internet connection. Loan Product Advisor utilizes the information
> obtained from:
>
> ■Data input by the originator
>
> ■Credit repositories
>
> ■HVE®
>
> Loan Product Advisor uses statistical models and judgmental rules to
> analyze the data received and then returns a Feedback Certificate.
> Loan Product Advisor will return credit information and for certain
> Mortgages will provide HVE support for the Mortgaged Premises.

**(b)Loan Product Advisor Mortgages**

> In order for a Mortgage to qualify as a Loan Product Advisor Mortgage,
> the Mortgage must meet all of the following criteria:
>
> ■Be submitted to Loan Product Advisor no more than 120 days before and
> no later than the Note Date, or for Construction Conversion and
> Renovation Mortgages, the Effective Date of Permanent Financing or,
> for Seller-Owned Modified Mortgages that are Home Possible® Mortgages,
> the modification date
>
> ■Have all credit reports (including the Loan Product Advisor credit
> reports) dated no more than 120 days before and no later than on the
> Note Date, or for Construction Conversion and Renovation Mortgages,
> the Effective Date of Permanent Financing

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* As of 08/02/23

> Chapter 5101\
> Page 5101-1
>
> ■Receive an automated underwriting service (AUS) status of "complete"
> on the Feedback Certificate based on the last submission to Loan
> Product Advisor on or before the Note Date, or for Construction
> Conversion and Renovation Mortgages, the Effective Date of Permanent
> Financing
>
> ■Comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter 5101
>
> Mortgages that are submitted to Loan Product Advisor and receive a
> status of ineligible, invalid or incomplete must be manually
> underwritten as Non-Loan Product Advisor Mortgages.
>
> For each Mortgage submitted, or to be submitted, to Loan Product
> Advisor, the Seller must consider each application without regard to
> the Borrower's race, color, religion, national origin, age, sex,
> marital status, familial status or handicap.

**(c)Last Feedback Certificate**

> The Last Feedback Certificate:
>
> ■Is, except as stated in Chapter 4602 and Section 5101.6, based on
> true, complete and accurate data as required by the Seller's Purchase
> Documents
>
> ■Is used by Freddie Mac to determine the Risk Class, Documentation
> Level and, Credit Fees
>
> ■Must be retained in the Mortgage file
>
> In delivering the Mortgage to Freddie Mac, the Seller represents and
> warrants that the applicable Feedback Certificates are retained in the
> Mortgage file and meet all of the requirements of Chapter 5101. If
> Freddie Mac subsequently determines that the Feedback Certificates are
> not in the Mortgage file, any representation and warranty relief,\
> Documentation Levels granted and/or payment or non-payment of fees are
> subject to change based on the actual contents of the Mortgage file.
>
> The purchase restrictions on the Loan Product Advisor Last Feedback
> Certificate are not customized for a Seller's specific Purchase
> Documents. Therefore, Sellers with Master Agreement terms or Guide
> Plus Additional Provisions may receive purchase restrictions on the
> Last Feedback Certificate that conflict with their negotiated terms.
> In such cases, the negotiated terms apply rather than any conflicting
> purchase restrictions.
>
> The Last Feedback Certificate may be transferred without restriction
> prior to delivery of the Mortgage to Freddie Mac. However, the Last
> Feedback Certificate and the conditions indicated on it are effective
> only with respect to Freddie Mac and only when the Mortgage is
> delivered to Freddie Mac by a Freddie Mac Seller in compliance with
> the Seller's Purchase Documents. (An example of a Feedback Certificate
> is included in the ***Loan Product Advisor User Guide***.)

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* As of 08/02/23

> Chapter 5101\
> Page 5101-2

**(d)Key Number**

> The Key Number is a unique identifier assigned to a Mortgage by Loan
> Product Advisor when the Mortgage is first submitted to Loan Product
> Advisor. The Key Number is returned to the Seller on the Feedback
> Certificate and is used by the Seller and Freddie Mac to identify an
> individual Mortgage (e.g., a purchase, a refinance, etc.) from
> application through closing and delivery.
>
> A Key Number is valid for use with only one Mortgage. Once that
> Mortgage has been closed, regardless of whether the Mortgage is sold
> to Freddie Mac, the Key Number may be used only in delivering that
> Mortgage to Freddie Mac or for the Seller's quality control process.
>
> The Key Number from a previously closed Mortgage may not be re-used to
> process or originate another Mortgage. Additionally, if the Borrower
> has more than one Mortgage in process, each loan must have a separate
> application and a different Key Number.
>
> The Seller may resubmit the Mortgage to Loan Product Advisor using the
> original Key Number, provided Freddie Mac has not removed the Key
> Number from Loan Product Advisor.
>
> For each Loan Product Advisor Mortgage delivered to Freddie Mac, the
> Seller must deliver the Key Number in the ULDD Data Point *Automated
> Underwriting Case Identifier*. A Mortgage delivered without a Key
> Number will be considered a Non-Loan Product Advisor Mortgage.
>
> The Seller is not required to deliver the Key Number on the following
> Mortgages, as they are considered Non-Loan Product Advisor Mortgages:
>
> ■Mortgages, other than Mortgages secured by Manufactured Homes,
> submitted to Loan Product Advisor on or before the Note Date, or for
> Construction Conversion and Renovation Mortgages, the Effective Date
> of Permanent Financing, that received an AUS status of invalid,
> ineligible or incomplete; the Seller must deliver the Key Number for
> Mortgages secured by Manufactured Homes that received an AUS status of
> invalid, ineligible or incomplete
>
> ■Mortgages submitted to Loan Product Advisor for the first time after
> the Note Date
>
> ■Mortgages delivered as Seller-Owned Converted Mortgages or
> Seller-Owned Modified Mortgages that are not Home Possible Accept
> Mortgages

**(e)Invalid, ineligible or incomplete status**

> Loan Product Advisor may return an assessment status of invalid,
> ineligible or incomplete. If resubmission with new and/or corrected
> information does not correct the status, the Mortgage cannot be
> processed through Loan Product Advisor. The Mortgage must be manually
> underwritten and delivered as a Non-Loan Product Advisor Mortgage.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* As of 08/02/23

> Chapter 5101\
> Page 5101-3

**(f)Number of Borrowers**

> Loan Product Advisor cannot assess more than five Borrowers on a
> single application. When there are more than five Borrowers the Seller
> must manually underwrite the Mortgage.

**(g)Compliance with Loan Product Advisor requirements**

> If the Mortgage and/or the Seller fail to comply with all Loan Product
> Advisor requirements, including, except as stated in Chapter 4602 and
> Section 5101.6, submission of true, complete and accurate data to Loan
> Product Advisor, the benefits and terms associated with the Loan
> Product Advisor Mortgage may not apply and the Mortgage may be subject
> to the terms and requirements for a Non-Loan Product Advisor and/or a
> Manually Underwritten Mortgage.

**(h)Required and optional data fields**

> Loan Product Advisor requires submission of specific data elements in
> order to process the information and return a complete result with a
> Risk Class and Documentation Level.
>
> Complete details of the required and optional data fields as well as
> the data field specifications can be found in the ***Loan Product
> Advisor User Guide***.