**4703.2: Minimum property insurance types and amounts (Future effective
date 06/01/24)**

**(a)1- to 4-unit properties**\
At a minimum, the insurable improvements on the Mortgaged Premises must
be insured for loss or damage from:\
■Fire\
■Lightning\
■Windstorm\
■Hail\
■Explosion\
■Riot\
■Civil commotion\
■Damage by aircraft

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-11

> ■Damage by vehicles\
> ■Damage by smoke\
> If any of the preceding perils is excluded from the primary insurance
> policy, coverage of the excluded peril must be provided through a
> secondary insurance policy.
>
> The deductible for fire, water (not caused by flooding) or wind damage
> to the insured improvements (generally designated as "dwelling" in the
> insurance policy) may not exceed 5 percent of the limit maintained for
> dwelling coverage.
>
> Insurance policies must provide for claims to be settled on a
> replacement cost basis. Policies that (1) provide for claims to be
> settled on an actual cash value basis, or (2) limit, depreciate,
> reduce or otherwise settle losses for less than a replacement cost
> basis are not eligible.
>
> The insurance limits must at least equal the higher of:\
> ■The UPB of the Mortgage\
> ■80% of the full replacement cost value (RCV) of the insurable
> improvements as of the current insurance policy effective date\
> The coverage required in accordance with the above formula must not
> exceed the replacement cost of the insurable improvements, even when
> the UPB of the Mortgage exceeds such replacement cost.
>
> The table below describes how to calculate the required amount of
> insurance.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| > **Step**                        | > **Description**                 |
+:==================================+:==================================+
| > 1                               | > Determine the UPB and the RCV.  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| > 2                               | > If the RCV is less than the     |
|                                   | > UPB, the required insurance     |
|                                   | > coverage is the RCV, and no     |
|                                   | > further calculation is          |
|                                   | > required. If the RCV is greater |
|                                   | > than the UPB, go to step 3.     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| > 3                               | > If the RCV is greater than the  |
|                                   | > UPB, calculate 80% of the RCV   |
|                                   | > and then go to step 4 or 5.     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| > 4                               | > If this calculation is equal to |
|                                   | > or less than the UPB, the UPB   |
|                                   | > is the amount of coverage       |
|                                   | > required or                     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| > 5                               | > If this calculation is greater  |
|                                   | > than the UPB, the 80%           |
|                                   | > calculation is the amount of    |
|                                   | > coverage required.              |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-12

> Examples:

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | **Property      | **Property B:** | **Property C:** |
|                 | A:**\           |                 |                 |
|                 | **The RCV is    | **80% of the**\ | > **80% of      |
|                 | less than the   | **RCV is equal  | > the**\        |
|                 | UPB**           | to or less than | > **RCV is      |
|                 |                 | the UPB**       | > greater than  |
|                 |                 |                 | > the UPB**     |
+:================+:===============:+:===============:+:===============:+
| > RCV           | \$80,000        | \$90,000        | \$90,000        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > UPB           | \$85,000        | \$80,000        | \$65,000        |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > 80% of        | \$64,000        | \$72,000        | \$72,000        |
| > replacement   |                 |                 |                 |
| > cost          |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| > Required      | \$80,000        | \$80,000        | \$72,000        |
| > insurance     |                 |                 |                 |
| > coverage      |                 |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

> Seller/Servicers must verify the RCV in order to complete the
> calculation above. The verification source may be (1) the replacement
> cost estimator utilized by the insurance carrier or an insurance risk
> appraisal; or (2) statement from property insurer, an independent
> insurance risk specialist, or other professional with appropriate
> resources to make such a determination.
>
> The Seller/Servicer must ensure that adequate insurance coverage is in
> force even when the improvements are vacant or unoccupied and must
> notify all insurers of any such change in occupancy in order to
> preserve its rights as mortgagee under the applicable insurance
> policy.

**(b)Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) and ground lease communities**

> Unit owners within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) and leasehold
> lessees within a ground lease community with residential properties
> similar to 1- to 4- unit properties can insure their units
> individually, provided that the requirements in Section 4703.2(a) are
> met.
>
> If the individual units are covered by insurance purchased by their
> respective owners or leasehold lessees, the PUD homeowners association
> or the fee simple landowner/lessor of the ground lease community, the
> Seller is not required to verifyinsurance for its Common Elements.
>
> Freddie Mac will also accept a master insurance policy covering all
> units in the PUD or ground lease community if called for in the PUD's
> governing documents or in the ground lease. The Seller/Servicer must
> confirm the master insurance policy limit covers 100% of the
> replacement cost value of the units, as of the current insurance
> policy effective date, but is not required to verify if a master
> insurance policy provides insurance for Common Elements. The
> verification source may be (1) the replacement cost estimator utilized
> by the insurance carrier or the project\'s insurance risk appraisal;
> or (2) statement from property insurer, an

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-13

> independent insurance risk specialist, or other professional with
> appropriate resources to make such a determination.
>
> The master insurance policy must provide for claims to be settled on a
> replacement cost basis. Policies that (1) provide for claims to be
> settled on an actual cash value basis, or (2) limit, depreciate,
> reduce or otherwise settle losses for less than a replacement cost
> basis are not eligible.
>
> The master insurance policy must be written on a special coverage form
> or equivalent.
>
> The PUD homeowners association or fee simple landowner/lessor must
> also obtain any additional coverage commonly required by private
> mortgage investors for developments similar in construction, location
> and use, including the following:
>
> ■Inflation guard endorsement -- this endorsement is required when it
> is applicable to the coverage and available in the insurance market
>
> ■Building ordinance or law endorsement -- this endorsement is not
> required if the building is legally conforming under current building,
> zoning or land use laws, or is not available; however, it is required
> if the enforcement of any law or ordinance results in increased costs
> such as demolition or loss to the undamaged portions of the building
> and the coverage is available in the insurance market
>
> ■Steam boiler and machinery or equipment breakdown endorsement -- this
> endorsement is required if a building in the project has a central
> heating ventilation and cooling (HVAC) system and the coverage is
> available in the insurance market
>
> The insurance limit per covered mechanical breakdown or equipment
> failure must equal the lesser of:
>
> ❑100% of the replacement cost of the building housing the equipment,
> or
>
> ❑\$2 million
>
> If a higher limit is required by private mortgage investors for PUDs
> similar in construction, location and use, the PUD homeowners
> association must maintain the higher insurance limit.
>
> The deductible for fire, water (not caused by flooding) or wind damage
> to the insured improvements (generally designated as "building" in the
> insurance policy) may not exceed 5% of the limit maintained for
> building coverage.
>
> If a master insurance policy deductible exceeds the 5% maximum due to
> a per unit deductible for named perils specific to a geographic area,
> the Mortgage is eligible for sale to Freddie Mac if the Borrower's
> unit is covered by an owner\'s HO-6 policy. The Borrower's owners
> policy must include the same perils as the master policy, cover master
> policy assessments levied on the unit owner and carry a sufficient
> coverage amount to cover the per unit amount

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-14

> over the permissible 5% limit. See Section 4703.2(c) below for an
> example of how to calculate sufficient coverage to meet the 5% maximum
> deductible requirement.
>
> The insurance policy of the PUD homeowners association or fee simple
> landowner/lessor of the ground lease community must name the insured
> in substantially the same language indicated below:
>
> **For PUDs:** Association of Owners of the \[Name of PUD\] Planned
> Unit Development for the use and benefit of the individual owners
> (designated by name, if required by law or the governing documents).
>
> **For ground lease communities:** \[Name of the lessor\] of the \[Name
> of the ground lease community\] for the use and benefit of the
> individual lessees (designated by name, if required by law or by the
> lease).
>
> Mortgages secured by units in a PUD with a master or blanket insurance
> policy that combines insurance coverage for multiple unaffiliated PUDs
> are eligible for sale to Freddie Mac provided that each covered PUD
> has a dedicated policy limit and a specific dedicated deductible that
> does not exceed the requirements above. Also, the policy must clearly
> state that each association is a named insured. The policy limit needs
> to cover the full replacement cost required for the Common Elements,
> and to the extent required, the units. Additionally, the insurance
> policy must meet all requirements of the Guide and other Purchase
> Documents applicable to master insurance policies covering PUDs such
> as:
>
> ■The insurance company underwriting the master policy must meet
> Freddie Mac insurance ratings requirements
>
> ■The protected perils must include those normally covered in policies
> for similar types of PUDs; and
>
> ■If applicable, the building ordinance or law endorsement and/or
> equipment breakdown endorsement
>
> Projects that are under the same master association and/or share the
> use of common facilities, whether those facilities are individually
> owned or owned as part of a master association or development, are
> considered to be affiliated projects. Multiple projects that do not
> meet one of these criteria, even if they are under the management of
> the same management company, are not considered to be affiliated
> projects.
>
> A policy with a coinsurance clause, and inclusion of an agreed amount
> endorsement or selection of the agreed value option (which waives the
> requirement for coinsurance) is considered acceptable evidence that
> the 100% replacement cost requirement has been met. If an agreed
> amount/agreed value provision is used, the agreed amount must be no
> less than the estimated replacement cost. If a coinsurance clause is
> included in the PUD homeowners association's policy or the fee simple
> landowner/lessor's policy, the policy is still eligible if the amount
> of coverage is at least equal to 100% replacement cost.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-15

**(c)Condominiums**

> The Project Documents will define the insurance requirements for the
> homeowners association and the individual unit owner in a Condominium
> Project, including a Detached Condominium Project and a 2- to 4-Unit
> Condominium Project. The insurance requirements will define the extent
> to which the homeowners association will insure the individual units
> and the unit owner responsibility for individual insurance.
>
> There are two acceptable options for unit coverage depending on what
> the governing documents indicate:
>
> ■The condominium homeowners association must insure the building and
> structures in the Condominium Project as well as fixtures, machinery,
> equipment and supplies maintained for the service of the Condominium
> Project. To the extent required the homeowners association must also
> insure fixtures, improvements, alterations and equipment within the
> individual Condominium Units, regardless of ownership. To the extent
> the condominium homeowners association's policy does not cover the
> interior of the Condominium Unit or the improvements to the
> Condominium Unit, the Borrower must maintain an HO-6 unit owner
> policy. Coverage for the HO-6 unit owner policy must be sufficient to
> repair the Condominium Unit to at least its condition prior to the
> claim.
>
> ■If the Project Documents allow Condominium Unit owners to insure
> their Condominium Units individually, in lieu of a master policy, the
> Mortgages secured by the Condominium Units are eligible for sale to
> Freddie Mac provided the requirements in Section 4703.2(a) are met.
> Common Elements must be covered through the condominium homeowners
> association policy and the homeowners association must maintain all
> other applicable insurance coverages required in Chapter 4703.
>
> The master insurance policy coverage limit must be at least equal to
> 100% of the replacement cost value of the project\'s improvements,
> including Common Elements and residential structures, as of the
> current insurance policy effective date.
>
> The Seller/Servicer must verify the coverage amount is not less than
> the minimum required as described above. The verification source may
> be (1) the replacement cost estimator utilized by the insurance
> carrier or the project\'s insurance risk appraisal; or (2) statement
> from property insurer, an independent insurance risk specialist, or
> other professional with\
> appropriate resources to make such a determination.
>
> The master insurance policy must provide for claims to be settled on a
> replacement cost basis. Policies that (1) provide for claims to be
> settled on an actual cash value basis, or (2) limit, depreciate,
> reduce or otherwise settle losses for less than a replacement cost
> basis are not eligible.
>
> The master insurance policy must be written on a special coverage form
> or equivalent. The condominium homeowners association must also obtain
> any additional coverage commonly

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-16

> required by private mortgage investors for developments similar in
> construction, location and use, including the following:
>
> ■Inflation guard endorsement -- this endorsement is required when it
> is applicable to the coverage and available in the insurance market
>
> ■Building ordinance or law endorsement -- this endorsement is not
> required if the building is legally conforming under current building,
> zoning or land use laws, or is not available; however, it is required
> if the enforcement of any law or ordinance results in increased costs
> such as demolition or loss to the undamaged portions of the building
> and the coverage is available in the insurance market
>
> ■Steam boiler and machinery or equipment breakdown endorsement -- this
> endorsement is required if a building in the project has an HVAC
> system and the coverage is available in the insurance market
>
> The insurance limit per covered mechanical breakdown or equipment
> failure must equal the lesser of:
>
> ❑100% of the replacement cost of the building housing the equipment,
> or
>
> ❑\$2 million
>
> If a higher limit is required by private mortgage investors for
> Condominium Projects similar in construction, location and use, the
> condominium homeowners association must maintain the higher insurance
> limits.
>
> ■Condominium Association Coverage Form or its equivalent, including
> the following provisions or comparable language:
>
> ❑Recognition of an Insurance Trustee (e.g., "If you name an insurance
> trustee, we will adjust losses with you, but we will pay the insurance
> trustee. If we pay the trustee, the payments will satisfy your claims
> against us.")
>
> ❑Waiver of Rights of Recovery (e.g., "We waive our rights to recover
> payment from any unit-owner of the condominium that is shown in the
> declarations.")
>
> ❑Unit-owner's Insurance (e.g., "A unit-owner may have other insurance
> covering the same property as this insurance. This insurance is
> intended to be primary, and not to contribute with such other
> insurance.")
>
> The condominium homeowners association's policy deductible for fire,
> water (not caused by flooding) or wind damage to the insured
> improvements (generally designated as "building" in the insurance
> policy) may not exceed 5% of the limit maintained for building
> coverage.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-17

> If the deductible exceeds the 5% maximum due to a per unit deductible
> for named perils specific to a geographic area, the Mortgage is
> eligible for sale to Freddie Mac if the\
> Borrower's unit is covered by an owner's HO-6 policy. The Borrower's
> owner's policy must include the same perils as the condominium
> association's master policy, cover master policy assessments levied on
> the unit owner and carry a sufficient coverage amount to cover the per
> unit amount over the permissible 5% limit.
>
> For example:
>
> ■Condominium association policy limit: \$6,000,000
>
> ■Number of units: 20
>
> ■Condominium association policy deductible: \$80,000
>
> ■Condominium association separate per unit deductible for ice dam
> coverage: \$40,000
>
> The master deductible of \$80,000 is 1.33% of the building coverage
> (\$80,000/\$6,000,000) and does not exceed the 5% deductible
> requirement. However, the per unit deductible is 13.3% ((\$40,000 x 20
> units)/\$6,000,000)) which is above the 5% maximum requirement and the
> policy is not acceptable.
>
> The maximum per unit deductible needed to meet the 5% deductible
> requirement is \$15,000 ((\$6,000,000/20) x .05)). To be eligible, the
> unit owner needs an HO-6 policy that would cover the \$25,000 per unit
> coverage (\$40,000 - \$15,000 = \$25,000).
>
> The insurance policy of the condominium homeowners association must
> name the insured in substantially the same language indicated below:
>
> Association of Owners of the \[Name of Condominium Project\]
> Condominium for the use and benefit of the individual owners
> (designated by name, if required by law or the governing documents).
>
> In the event the HO-6 unit owner policy is required, the policy must
> include the standard Mortgage clause required in Section 4703.6.
>
> Mortgages secured by a Condominium Unit in a Condominium Project with
> a master insurance policy that combines insurance coverage for
> multiple unaffiliated Condominium Projects are eligible for sale to
> Freddie Mac provided that each covered Condominium Project has a
> dedicated policy limit and a specific dedicated deductible that does
> not exceed the requirements above. Also, the policy must clearly state
> that each association is a named insured. The policy limit must cover
> the full replacement cost of the Common Elements, and to the extent
> required, the Condominium Units, as of the current insurance policy
> effective date. Additionally, the insurance policy must meet all
> requirements of Chapter 4703 of the Guide and other Purchase Documents
> applicable to master insurance policies covering Condominium Projects
> such as:

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-18

> ■The insurance company underwriting the master policy must meet
> Freddie Mac insurance ratings requirements;
>
> ■The protected perils must include those normally covered in policies
> for similar types of Condominium Projects; and
>
> ■If applicable, the building ordinance or law endorsement and/or
> equipment breakdown endorsement.
>
> Condominium Projects that are under the same master association and/or
> share the use of common facilities, whether those facilities are
> individually owned or owned as part of a master association or
> development, are considered to be affiliated projects. Multiple
> Condominium Projects that do not meet one of these criteria, even if
> they are under the management of the same management company, are not
> considered to be affiliated projects.

**(d)Cooperative Corporations**

> The Cooperative Corporation must insure the building and structures in
> the Cooperative Project as well as fixtures, machinery, equipment and
> supplies maintained for the service of the project. To the extent
> required by the Cooperative Project Documents, the Cooperative
> Corporation must also insure fixtures, improvements, alterations and
> equipment within the individual Cooperative Units, regardless of
> ownership.
>
> To the extent the Cooperative Corporation policy does not cover the
> interior of the Cooperative Unit or the improvements to the
> Cooperative Unit (the fixtures, improvements, alterations and
> equipment within the individual Cooperative Units), the Borrower must
> maintain an HO-6 unit owner's policy. Coverage for the H0-6 unit owner
> policy must be sufficient to repair the Cooperative Unit to at least
> its condition prior to the claim. If the Cooperative Corporation
> policy fully covers the interior or the improvements to the Cooperate
> Unit, an H0-6 unit owner policy is not required.
>
> The Cooperative Corporation's master insurance policy coverage limit
> must be at least equal to 100% of the replacement cost value of the
> project's improvements, including common elements and residential
> structures, as of the current insurance policy effective date.
>
> The Seller/Servicer must verify the coverage amount is not less than
> the minimum required as described above. The verification source may
> be the (1) replacement cost estimator utilized by the insurance
> carrier or the project's insurance risk appraisal; or (2) statement
> from property insurer, an independent insurance risk specialist, or
> other professional with appropriate resources to make such a
> determination.
>
> The master insurance policy must provide for claims to be settled on a
> replacement cost basis. Policies that (1) provide for claims to be
> settled on an actual cash value basis, or (2) limit, depreciate,
> reduce or otherwise settle losses for less than a replacement cost
> basis are not eligible.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-19

> The master insurance policy must be written on a special coverage form
> or equivalent.
>
> The Cooperative Corporation must also obtain any additional coverage
> commonly required by private mortgage investors for Cooperative
> Projects similar in construction, location, and use, including the
> following:
>
> ■Inflation guard endorsement -- required when it is applicable to the
> coverage and available in the insurance market
>
> ■Building ordinance or law endorsement -- not required if the building
> is legally\
> conforming under current building, zoning or land use laws or is not
> available; however, it is required if the enforcement of any law or
> ordinance results in increased costs such as demolition or loss to the
> undamaged portions of the building and the coverage is available in
> the insurance market
>
> ■Steam boiler and machinery or equipment breakdown endorsement --
> required if a building in the Cooperative Project has a central
> heating ventilation and cooling system and the coverage is available
> in the insurance market.
>
> The insurance limit per covered mechanical breakdown or equipment
> failure must equal the lesser of:
>
> ■100% of the replacement cost of the building housing the equipment,
> or
>
> ■\$2 million
>
> The deductible for fire, water (not caused by flooding) or wind damage
> to the insured improvements (generally designated as "building" in the
> insurance policy) may not exceed 5% of the limit maintained for
> building coverage.
>
> If the deductible exceeds the 5% maximum due to a per unit deductible
> for named perils specific to a geographic area, the Cooperative Share
> Loan is eligible for sale to Freddie Mac if the Borrower's unit is
> covered by an owner's HO-6 policy. The Borrower's owner's policy must
> include the same perils as the Cooperative Corporation's master
> policy, cover master policy assessments levied on the Shareholder and
> carry a sufficient coverage amount to cover the per unit amount over
> the permissible 5% limit.See Section 4703.2(c) above for an example of
> how to calculate sufficient coverage to meet the 5% maximum deductible
> requirement for Cooperative Corporation Units.
>
> Shareholders within a Cooperative Project of detached Cooperative
> Units can insure their units individually, provided that the
> requirements in Section 4703.2(a) are met and the Cooperative
> Corporation's governing documents permit it.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-20

**4703.3: Flood insurance (02/07/23)**

**See Bulletin 2024-1 for updates related to insurance coverage for
Mortgaged Premises. Sellers are encouraged to begin implementation
immediately or before the mandatory June 1, 2024, effective date.**

**(a)Determining if a property requires flood insurance**

> A flood zone determination (FZD) must be made for each property
> securing a Mortgage sold to Freddie Mac.
>
> An FZD must be documented by a completed FEMA Standard Flood Hazard
> Determination Form, FEMA Form 086-0-032 (Exhibit 13, Standard Flood
> Hazard Determination Form \[SFHDF\]) in accordance with federal law.
> The SFHDF may be used in a printed,\
> computerized or electronic manner and must be retained for the life of
> the Mortgage in either hard copy or electronic format. Any alternative
> electronic format must contain all mandatory fields indicated on the
> SFHDF.
>
> The date in the "Date of Determination" field on the SFHDF must be a
> date that is no more than 120 days before the Note Date of the
> Mortgage, or, if applicable, the Note Date of the refinance Mortgage.
> However, the "Date of Determination" field on the SFHDF may be a date
> that is more than 120 days before the Note Date of the Mortgage or, if
> applicable, the Note Date of the refinance Mortgage, if the Seller
> uses a "life of loan" FZD where the third party providing the FZD
> provides a "life of loan" certificate assuring that the Mortgage is
> monitored for compliance.
>
> The loan number or other identifying information in the "Loan
> Identifier" field on the SFHDF must be the loan number or other
> identifying information for the Mortgage or, if applicable, the
> refinance Mortgage.
>
> The Seller/Servicer warrants that any FZD made by a party other than
> the Seller/Servicer is guaranteed by the FZD maker to be accurate, in
> accordance with federal law. The\
> Seller/Servicer, however, remains responsible to Freddie Mac for the
> accuracy of any FZD made by the Seller/Servicer or any party other
> than the Seller/Servicer.
>
> If the SFHDF identifies the insurable improvements on the Mortgaged
> Premises as located in an area that has been identified as a Special
> Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) containing the letter "A" or "V" within its
> designated zone on a flood map (Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood
> Insurance Rate Map) of FEMA, the Seller/Servicer must ensure that
> flood insurance is obtained and maintained on such improvements for
> the term of the Mortgage.
>
> The Seller/Servicer may waive or discontinue the flood insurance
> requirement if:
>
> ■The Borrower and the Seller/Servicer have obtained, following a joint
> request to FEMA as provided under federal law, a Letter of
> Determination Review (LODR) concluding that the insurable improvements
> are not in the SFHA, or

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-21

> ■The Borrower has provided the Seller/Servicer with a Letter of Map
> Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA excluding the insurable improvements or the
> entire property from the SFHA, or
>
> ■The Borrower has provided the Seller/Servicer with a Letter of Map
> Revision (LOMR) from FEMA removing the community's SFHA designation
>
> The Borrower must maintain flood insurance on the insurable
> improvements until FEMA issues a LOMA, LOMR or LODR. Upon issuance of
> a LOMA, LOMR or LODR, the Borrower may request from FEMA a refund of
> paid flood insurance premiums through the insurance agent servicing
> the flood insurance policy. A copy of the LOMA, LOMR or LODR, as
> applicable, must be maintained in the Mortgage file in accordance with
> Chapters 3401, 3301 and 3302.
>
> If the insurable improvements on the Mortgaged Premises are located in
> an SFHA but the community does not participate in the National Flood
> Insurance Program (NFIP) ("nonparticipating community"), the Mortgage
> is not eligible for sale to Freddie Mac.
>
> If the insurable improvements on the Mortgaged Premises are located in
> an area that has not been mapped by FEMA and the Seller/Servicer is
> not aware of any flood risks to which the improvements are exposed,
> the Mortgage is eligible for sale to Freddie Mac without the benefit
> of flood insurance. If the area has not been mapped by FEMA but the
> Seller/Servicer is aware that the insurable improvements are exposed
> to flood risks, the Mortgage is not eligible for sale to Freddie Mac
> without flood insurance on the improvements.

**(b)Acceptable flood insurance policies**

> The flood insurance policy may be one of the following:
>
> ■A standard policy issued by the NFIP, or
>
> ■A policy issued by a private insurer that is qualified under Section
> 4703.1, with at least equivalent terms and conditions to the standard
> NFIP policy for the types of\
> improvements insured, including coverage, deductibles and exclusions
> and conditions offered

**(c)Coverage required**

> **(i)1- to 4-unit properties**
>
> If the community where the Mortgaged Premises are located participates
> in the Emergency Program of the NFIP, the flood insurance coverage on
> the insurable improvements must at least equal the lowest of the
> following:
>
> ■The UPB of the Mortgage

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-22

> ■The maximum amount of coverage currently sold under the Emergency
> Program of the NFIP for the type of improvements insured
>
> ■The replacement cost of the insurable improvements
>
> The Seller/Servicer must ensure that the Borrower increases flood
> insurance coverage on the insurable improvements when the community
> moves into the Regular Program of the NFIP as described below.
>
> If the community where the Mortgaged Premises are located participates
> in the Regular Program of the NFIP, the flood insurance coverage on
> the insurable improvements must at least equal the lowest of the
> following:
>
> ■The UPB of the Mortgage
>
> ■The maximum amount of coverage currently sold under the Regular
> Program of the NFIP for the type of improvements insured
>
> ■The replacement cost of the insurable improvements
>
> The deductible may not exceed the maximum deductible amount currently
> allowed under the NFIP for the type of improvements insured.
>
> For 1- to 4-unit properties, the Seller/Servicer may waive the flood
> insurance requirements for structures on the Mortgaged Premises that
> are detached from the primary residential structure and do not serve
> as a residence.
>
> **(ii)PUD or ground lease community units**
>
> Flood insurance requirements for 1- to 4-unit properties apply to
> similar residential properties within a PUD or ground lease community.
>
> **(iii) Condominium Units**
>
> Flood insurance requirements for 1- to 4-unit properties apply to
> similar residential properties in a 2- to 4-Unit Condominium Project
> or Detached Condominium Project.
>
> If the Condominium Unit securing a Mortgage sold to or serviced for
> Freddie Mac is in a building in a Condominium Project other than a 2-
> to 4-Unit Condominium Project or Detached Condominium Project and all
> or part of the building is in an SFHA, the following flood insurance
> coverage, as applicable, is required:

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-23

> **A.Condominium owners association's coverage**
>
> The condominium owners association must maintain building coverage on
> the building for the lower of (i) 80% of the building's replacement
> cost or (ii) \$250,000 multiplied by the number of residential units
> in the building.
>
> The condominium owners association must maintain contents coverage on
> the building for the lower of (i) the actual cash value of the
> contents in the building that are owned in common by the association
> members or (ii) the maximum amount of contents coverage sold by the
> NFIP for a condominium building.
>
> The deductible of the condominium owners association's coverage may
> not exceed the maximum deductible amount currently allowed under the
> NFIP for condominium association building coverage. The deductible for
> association building contents may not exceed the maximum deductible
> amount currently allowed under the NFIP for association building
> contents.
>
> **B.Unit owner's coverage**
>
> To the extent the condominium owners association's building coverage
> meets the minimum requirements above, but the Condominium Unit
> allocation does not meet the 1- to 4-unit coverage requirement, the
> Borrower must maintain supplemental coverage on the Condominium Unit.
> The coverage must be at least equal to the difference between the
> condominium associations' building coverage allocated to that
> Condominium Unit and the amount required on a 1- to 4-unit property.
>
> The deductible may not exceed the maximum deductible allowed for a 1-
> to 4-unit property.
>
> **(iv)Cooperative Corporations**
>
> The Cooperative Corporation must maintain flood insurance on each
> building that is located in an SFHA.
>
> The building coverage must be the lower of (i) 100% of the building's
> replacement cost, or (ii) the maximum amount of building coverage sold
> by the NFIP.
>
> The contents coverage must be the lower of (i) 100% of the insurable
> replacement cost of all contents owned by the Cooperative Corporation,
> or (ii) the maximum amount of contents coverage sold by the NFIP.
>
> The deductible of the Cooperative Corporation coverage may not exceed
> the maximum deductible amount currently allowed under NFIP for
> building coverage. The deductible for Cooperative Corporation building
> contents may not exceed the maximum deductible amount currently
> allowed under the NFIP for contents coverage.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4703 As of
02/07/24 Page 4703-24

> A blanket policy of flood insurance covering more than one building or
> structure in the Cooperative Project is acceptable if each building or
> structure covered by the blanket policy is insured for at least the
> individual building and contents limits stated above.