**4701.2: Mortgage insurance premiums (10/02/23)**

Eligible Mortgage insurance premiums include the following:

■**Monthly premium**: Premiums paid monthly from accumulated escrow
deposits (with no initial payment at closing)

■**Annual premium**: An initial premium paid at closing to cover the
first year's premium and annual renewal premium payments thereafter paid
from accumulated escrow deposits

■**Single-premium**: A lump-sum premium paid at closing to purchase life
of Mortgage coverage

■**Split-premium**: An initial up-front payment premium paid at closing
and an ongoing monthly premium paid from accumulated escrow deposits

For Borrower-paid mortgage insurance premiums, the Borrower must pay the
mortgage insurance premium by a single payment at closing, through
monthly Escrow payments or as a combination of the two. A Mortgage that
includes a Borrower-paid mortgage insurance premium in the Note Rate is
not eligible for sale to Freddie Mac.

Lender-paid mortgage insurance premiums for annual and monthly premium
programs must be included in the Servicing Spread included in the Note
Rate on the Mortgage (see Section 4701.2(b)). Mortgages with
single-premium lender-paid mortgage insurance do not require an
adjustment to the Minimum Servicing Spread.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4701 As of
02/07/24 Page 4701-3

**(a)Borrower-paid financed premiums**

> For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
>
> ■**Base LTV ratio:** The loan-to-value (LTV) ratio calculated using
> the Mortgage amount without the financed mortgage insurance premium
>
> ■**Gross LTV ratio:** The LTV ratio calculated using the Mortgage
> amount which includes the financed mortgage insurance premium
>
> Mortgages for which the Borrower-paid mortgage insurance premium is
> included as part of the principal amount of the Mortgage (that is, a
> financed premium) are eligible for purchase provided the Mortgage
> complies with the requirements below:
>
> ■The Base LTV ratio must not exceed the maximum LTV ratio permitted
> for the Mortgage Product or offering
>
> ■The Gross LTV ratio must not exceed 95%, except for Home Possible®
> Mortgages, HomeOne® Mortgages and HeritageOneSM Mortgages, for which
> the Gross LTV ratio must not exceed 97%
>
> ■The Mortgaged Premises must be a 1- to 4-unit Primary Residence or a
> 1-unit second home
>
> ■The Mortgage is a fixed-rate, fully amortizing Mortgage or an ARM
>
> ■The amount of coverage meets the standard coverage level requirements
> in Section 4701.1 using the Base LTV ratio
>
> ■The mortgage insurance premium must be paid with a Borrower-paid
> single-premium or split-premium payment.
>
> **Financed mortgage insurance premium endorsement**
>
> The mortgage insurance policy must include an endorsement, generally
> referred to as the "financed mortgage insurance premium endorsement."
> This endorsement states that adjustments will be made to the claim
> calculation to meet the required exposure level for the Base LTV
> ratio.
>
> **Maximum original loan amount**
>
> The maximum original loan amounts provided in Section 4203.3 apply to
> Mortgages with financed mortgage insurance premiums. The original loan
> amount of the Mortgage inclusive of the amount of any financed
> mortgage insurance premium may not exceed the maximum original loan
> limits provided in Section 4203.3.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4701 As of
02/07/24 Page 4701-4

> **Delivery requirements for Mortgages with financed mortgage insurance
> premium**
>
> See Section 6302.21 for delivery requirements. Any applicable Credit
> Fees will be assessed based on the Mortgage's Gross LTV ratio and the
> UPB, which includes the financed mortgage insurance premium.

**(b)Lender-paid mortgage insurance**

> Freddie Mac will purchase Mortgages with single, annual or monthly
> premium lender-paid mortgage insurance as follows:
>
> **(i)For annual and monthly premiums:**
>
> ■The Mortgage is a fixed-rate, fully amortizing Mortgage or a
> non-convertible ARM
>
> ■The Mortgage is not a super conforming Mortgage
>
> ■For monthly and annual premium programs, premium payments are made
> from the Servicing Spread compensation.
>
> To ensure that the Servicer receives sufficient Servicing compensation
> after premium payments are made:
>
> ❑For fixed-rate Mortgages, the Minimum Contract Servicing Spread must
> be at least 0.250% and the maximum Servicing Spread may not exceed
> 0.500%. The Minimum Contract Servicing Spread must be equal to or
> greater than the\
> Minimum Servicing Spread. The Minimum Contract Servicing Spread must
> be no less than the sum of the Minimum Servicing Spread plus the
> amount necessary to pay the mortgage insurance premium when due and
> must not exceed 0.500%.
>
> ❑For non-convertible ARMs, see the Minimum Contract Servicing Spread
> requirements in Sections 6102.8 and 6201.3(c)
>
> ■Coverage will be maintained for the life of the Mortgage. A change in
> MI may be allowed if approved by Freddie Mac (see Chapter 8203).
>
> ■The Mortgage is sold under the Guarantor or MultiLender Swap program
>
> The Seller must obtain Freddie Mac's approval to sell Mortgages with
> annual or monthly premium lender-paid mortgage insurance to Freddie
> Mac. The Seller should request this approval by calling its account
> manager or 800-FREDDIE.
>
> **(ii)For single premiums:**
>
> ■The Mortgage is a Mortgage eligible for purchase under the Purchase
> Documents

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* Chapter 4701 As of
02/07/24 Page 4701-5

> ■Coverage will be maintained for the life of the Mortgage. A change in
> MI may be allowed if approved by Freddie Mac (see Chapter 8203).

■The Seller must ensure that the required mortgage insurance for the
Mortgage is in full force and effective on the Delivery Date of the
Mortgage regardless of whether the entire mortgage insurance premium is
paid by the Seller prior to the Delivery Date. The Seller must obtain
and be able to produce evidence of any required mortgage insurance
(including, but not limited to, a certificate of insurance).

> See Section 6302.21 for delivery requirements for Mortgages with
> lender-paid mortgage insurance.
>
>