**4603.4: Underwriting requirements for super conforming Mortgages
(01/01/22)**

**(a)Loan Product Advisor®Mortgages**

> All super conforming Mortgages must be submitted to Loan Product
> Advisor.
>
> The Borrower's credit reputation is acceptable if the Mortgage
> receives a Risk Class of Accept.
>
> If the Mortgage receives a risk assessment status of invalid,
> ineligible or incomplete, the Seller must take all steps possible in
> accordance with Chapter 5101 to correct the information and resubmit
> the Mortgage.
>
> Super conforming Mortgages that have never been submitted to Loan
> Product Advisor are not eligible for delivery.
>
> The Seller must enter the Key Number (which is referred to as the Loan
> Prospector® AUS Key Number in Loan Selling Advisor®) in the ULDD Data
> Point *Automated Underwriting Case Identifier* for all super
> conforming Mortgage transactions.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* As of 01/01/24

> Chapter 4603\
> Page 4603-4

**(b)Non-Loan Product Advisor Mortgages**

> Super conforming Mortgages with a risk assessment status of invalid,
> ineligible or\
> incomplete must be manually underwritten in accordance with Topics
> 5100 through 5500 and this chapter.
>
> Noncredit Payment References are prohibited to establish an acceptable
> credit reputation for super conforming Mortgages.
>
> To be eligible for sale to Freddie Mac, a minimum Indicator Score is
> required for super conforming Manually Underwritten Mortgages. The
> minimum Indicator Score requirements for Mortgages sold to Freddie Mac
> can be found in Exhibit 25, Mortgages with Risk Class and/or Minimum
> Indicator Score Requirements.