**5702.1: Requirements for Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) (10/07/20)**

Freddie Mac requires the Seller to identify if a unit is located in a
Planned Unit Development (PUD). Freddie Mac defines a PUD as a real
estate project in which:\
■Each unit owner holds title to the lot and the improvements on the lot\
■The homeowners association holds title to the Common Elements\
■The unit owners have a right to the use of the Common Elements, and\
■The unit owners pay a fee to the homeowners association to maintain the
Common Elements for their benefit\
Note: Zoning is not a basis for classifying a project or subdivision as
a PUD. To be classified as a PUD, units in projects or subdivisions must
meet all the requirements above.

Sellers should also be familiar with the following Glossary terms:\
■Common Elements\
■Limited Common Elements\
■Amenities\
■Project Documents\
■Master Association\
**(a)PUD and Homeowners Association**\
When reviewing a PUD to determine if it meets the requirement in this
section, Sellers must consider all units and spaces that the Homeowners
Association holds title to or has insured.

> A Homeowners Association is comprised of unit owners that maintain the
> Common Elements in a PUD for the benefit of the unit owners. In PUDs,
> the Homeowners Association owns the Common Elements, and maintains
> them for the benefit of the unit owners.

Freddie Mac *Single-Family Seller/Servicer Guide* As of 10/07/20

> Chapter 5702\
> Page 5702-1

**(b)Condominium Units in PUDs**

> If a Condominium Unit is located in a PUD, the Seller must comply with
> the Condominium requirements and warranties in Chapter 5701 and the
> PUD requirements and warranties in this chapter.

**(c)Leasehold estates**

> If the PUD unit or any PUD Common Element is on a leasehold estate,
> the Seller must comply with the leasehold estate requirements in
> Chapter 5704 and the PUD requirements and warranties in this chapter.

**(d)Manufactured Homes in a PUD**

> If a Manufactured Home is located in a PUD, the Seller must comply
> with the Manufactured Home requirements and warranties in Chapter 5703
> and the PUD requirements and\
> warranties in this Chapter 5702.

**(e)Insurance**

> The Seller must represent and warrant that the property insurance
> requirements in Sections 4703.2, 4703.3 and 4703.7 have been met.